# MECH2110-2019
These labs run in a second year mechanical design course at the University of Newcastle Australia, they are intended to support students attempting the Warman Design and Build Competition.
This project is licensed under the terms of the GNU AFFERO GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 3.

## Warman Competition
Student’s in MECH2110 participate in Engineers Australia – Warman Design and Build Competition – which is a unique project-based problem-solving experience held annually for teams of nominally four second-year mechanical-engineering students in universities across the Asia Pacific region. Typically around 20 to 25 universities across Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, Malaysia and China compete annually. The project takes place on two levels. Initially each university campus conducts a local competition under the guidance of a Campus Organiser, then the Chosen representatives from each university participate in an International Final, traditionally held over the course of a weekend in Sydney, during September.  

The Warman Design and Build Competition presents a new challenge each year that requires students to conceive, develop, implement and test a mechanical system (a machine) in a way that can be integrated within the coursework of their first undergraduate engineering design course, whether mechanical, mechatronic or any other mechanical specialisation.  

At the University of Newcastle, the competition provides a unique “hands-on” project-based problem-solving experience within MECH2110 – Mechanical Engineering Design 1 that comprises both Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering Students. Students are introduced to the competition rules and guidelines in week 1 of semester and the form groups of multidisciplinary teams of up to 4 students. Students then work together to analyse and formulate the problem, develop a number of conceptual designs, then build, test and commission a device to complete the task. Students are required to manufacture and fabricate their prototype system themselves using commonly available materials, components and methods. 
Design and build projects are often used in engineering programs with well documented learning benefits. From an engineering education perspective design and build projects:  
Expose students to the reality of their engineering discipline. 
Enable students to develop and enhance skills in a safe learning environment. 
Push students beyond academic and social comfort zones. 
Enhances a student’s ability to transition into the workforce by exposing them to open ended problems and uncertainty. 

## These Labs
In 2017 a series of mechatronics labs were introduced into this exclusively mechanical course. These innovative tutorials are specifically designed to guide students through the basics of acquiring data from sensors, control actuators, and combining this knowledge to perform a simple navigation task, all in the context of the Warman competition. The tutorials have been designed and developed around the specific needs of the competition and the tasks that the devices are likely to perform. While the competition rules are designed to encourage creative and innovative solutions, providing students with a toolbox of new skills they can integrate into their designs has seen students exploring a greater range of options, that in turn has led to more innovative and successful solutions.  